Chapter 15 -- Concentration of solutions

1. What is the unit of concentration and molarity?

2. State the definition of concnetration.

3. Calculations questions
a) Basic types (e.g. finding no. of moles of solute with given molarity, M1V1 = M2V2)
b) Involves chemical equations (e.g. includes mole ratio of atoms and compounds)
c) Advanced types
    i) find molarity of acid with given density of acid and mass percentage of acid (need to let 100cm3 of acid)
    ii) from i) find the volume of acid needed to dilute a certain molarity of solution (check q5)

4. Why are commonly used solutions often purchased or prepared in concentration form?

5. Describe the purpose and process of dilution.

Common mistakes/misconceptions, tips:
1. Remember molarity = no. of moles of SOLUTE / volume of SOLUTION 
2. Always check if cm3 or dm3 is used
3. Do more practice questions on textbook
4. Remember to include the correct unit for long question calculations (e.g. molar mass = g mol^-1)

Chapter 16 -- Indicators and phenolphthalein

1. According to the principle of self-ionisation of water, why does water not conduct electricity even though it has mobile ions?

Answer: The self-ionisation of water is relatively rare and only a small fraction of molecules ionizes to form mobile ions in one time.
        The low concentration of ions resulting from self-ionization is insufficient to facilitate the flow of electric current.

2. What does a pH value represent?

3. State the purpose of a pH scale. (Ans: It is used to measure the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a solution)

4a) What is an indicator? (Ans: It is a substance which gives different colours in acidic and alkaline solutions)
4b) State three types of common acid-base indicators found in the laboratory and their respective colours at different pH levels.

5. What are the 2 usages of buffer solution in pH sensors?

Answer: (1) To provides a stable environment for the pH sensor/maintain a constant pH and allows more accurate detection of H+ (2) For callibration* 
*(By immersing the sensor in the buffer solution, it establishes a baseline reading and allows for accurate pH measurement of other unknown solutions.)

6. State the advantages of using a data logger with a pH sensor.

Answer: can be used in remote/dangerous situations, can be carried out 24/7, more accurate (X human error), frequent time intervals for collecting data etc.

Common mistakes/misconceptions, tips, extra info:
1. [H+][OH-] = 10^-14
2. pH value of an acid can be lower than 0 (e.g. 10M of HCl). However, note that there is a maximum molarity of each type of acid. (e.g. HCl: 12.1M)
3. The colour of indicators (e.g. methyl orange) shown at different pH levels also depend on its concentration. (slight variations)
4. The pH shown by universal indicators can only be an integer if the colour scale only consists of integers.
    (e.g. if it lies between pH 1 and pH 2 we cannot say the pH is 1.5, instead just compare which is closer)
5. Buffer solutions can have different pH (e.g. pH4: acetic acid-sodium acetate buffer, pH7: phosphate buffer, pH10: borate buffer)

Chapter 17 -- Strength of acids and alkalis

1. State the definition of strength and concentration.

2. State the difference between strong/weak acids/alkalis.

3. Give a few examples of strong/weak acids/alkalis.

4a) Suggest 2 physical methods and 1 chemical method to distinguish the strength between two acids with the same molarity.

-pH, electrical conductivity
-add magnesium and compare the rate of gas bubbles evolved per unit time

4b) Suggest another chemical method for distinguishing the strength between two alkalis.

-compare moles of salt formed in neutralization between HCl and 2 different alkalis (mass cannot be compared because different salts have different relative atomic masses)
-compare the heat evolved in neutralization reaction (higher temperature change, stronger alkali)

5. Write the two step reaction of sulphric acid and sodium hydroxide.