Chapter 42 - Introduction to selected homologous series

1. Explain why there a lot of organic compounds with reference to the properties of carbon. (RECAP)

Ans: -C atom can form strong covalent with itself and other atoms
     -C atom can form up to 4 bonds with other C atoms to give chains, branched chains and rings
     -C atom can form multiple bonds (double bonds and triple bonds) with C, N and O atoms
    
2. Explain the chracteristics of members in a homologous series (RECAP).

3. What is a functional group? (RECAP) (Ans: An atom or group of atoms that govern the major chemical properties of the organic compound)

4. Why do the difference in b.p. of alkanes and their corresponding alcohols become smaller as the no. of C atoms in molecules increase?

Ans: -An alcohol molecule is made of 2 parts - the non-polar hydrocarbon chain and the polar -OH group
     -As the No. of C atoms in an alcohols molecule increases, the influence of the -OH group become less significant compared with that of increasingly large H/C chain
     (Properties of higher alcohols tend more and more towards those of the corresponding non-polar alkanes))

5. Explain whether amines with small alkyls groups are soluble in water. [RECAP]

Ans: -An amine group has H-atom(s) bonded to a highly electronegative N atom and N-H bond is strongly polarized
     -~ can form a large no. of H-bonds with polar water molecules

6. In an exp under a specific condition, the measured R.M.M. of ethanoic acid is 85.7. Comment on the value obtained.

Ans: -Under the condition of the exp., some ethanoic acid exist as dimers owning to H-bond formation
     -Measured R.M.M. of ethanoic acid lies somewhere between 60 to 120

7. Explain why the density of propan-1-ol is greater than that of propan-2-ol.

Ans: C is more spherical than D. Strength of v.d.w. of propan-1-ol is strong than propan-2-ol as it has a greater contact surface area. The stronger intermolecular forces in ~ leads to higher density.

8. Suggest why isoamyl acetate is soluble in most non-polar organi compounds.

Ans: It is a relatively non-polar compound. The intermolecular forces between its molecules and the molecules of most non-polar organic solvent are of comparable strength.

Common misconceptions/tips/points to note:
1. When describing contrasting properties between 2 different functional groups, always state that it is the molecules with similar R.M.M. that is being compared.

Chapter 43 -- Isomerism

1a) What are isomers? (Ans: Compounds with the same molecular formula but different arrangement of atoms.)
1b) What are chain isomers? (Ans: Isomers that have the same functional groups but different carbon skeleton.)
1c) What are position isomers? (Ans: Isomers that have the same functional group and carbon skeleton but different in the position of the functional group.)
1d) What are functional group isomers? (Ans: Isomers with different functional groups.)
1e) What are stereoisomers? (Ans: Isomers in which atoms are joined in the same order but have a different spatial arrangement.)
1f) What are cis-trans isomers? (Ans: Stereoisomers for which spatial arrangement is different because free rotation is restricted by the presence of a C-C double bond.)
1g) What is a chiral molecule? (Ans: A molecule which is not superimposable on its mirror image.)
1h) What are enantiomers? (Ans: A chiral molecule and its mirror image are called a pair of enantiomers.)
1i) What is a plane of symmetry? (Ans: An imaginary plane that bisects a molecule into two halves which are mirror reflections of each other.)
1j) What is a chiral carbon? (Ans: The carbon attached to four different atoms or groups of atoms.)
1k) What is optical activity? (Ans: The ability of a molecule to rotate the plane of plane-polarized light)

2a) How can we measure the optical activity of enantiomers? (Ans*: By using a polarimeter. 2 enantiomers cause exactly the same extent of rotation of the plane of plane-polarized light, but in OPPOSITE directions.)
2b) State a physical property which is different for each enantiomer of the same pair. (Ans: They rotate the plane of plane-polarized light to opposite directions.) 

*: (+)-x rotates the plane of polarization of ~ clockwise, while (-) rorates ~ anticlock to the same extent

3a) Explain why hex-3-ene can exist as separate cis and trans isomers.
Ans: -There is restricted rotation about a C=C bond
     -2 different groups are attached to each C of the double bond

3b) Account for the occurrence of cis-trans isomers.
Ans: Each doubly-bonded C atom in the compound is attached to different atoms.

4. The melting point of cis-x is lower than that of trans-x. Explain the difference in m.p. of the two isomers.

Ans: -In addition to intermolecular forces, the m.p. of a copmound depends on the packing efficiency of molecules in solid state
     -Cis-x is less symmetrical than trans-x so it has lower packing efficiency and thus has a lower m.p.

5. (Element Ch11 q18b) Both dimethyl fumarate and A can be hydrolysed to their corresponding dicarboxylic acids, B and C. Explain why the m.p. of C is lower than B.

Ans: -C forms intramolecular H-bonds, due to close proximity of the 2 -COOH groups <intramolecular H-bond diagram>
     -B does not form any intramolecular H-bonds and can form intermolcular H-bonds per molecule, so C has lower m.p.

6a) (Element Ch11 q24c) Describe two possible disadvantages of producing a drug containing a mixture of several stereoisomers.
Ans: Higher doses are required. Other stereoisomers may have harmful side effects.

6b) Element Ch11 q36c) It is known that among the 2 stereoisomers, only B has stimulant activity whie the other does not. Why?
Ans: The target site of the stimulant is chiral. The reaction between B and its target site is stereo-specific

6c) (Element Ch11 q35b) Will the stereoisomers have same chemical properties? Explain.
Ans: Yes, unless the reaction counterpart is optically active.

7. What structural feature causes the compound to have enantiomers? (Ans: The molecule coantains one C atom bonded to 4 differen groups)

8. Explain why there are no cis-trans isomers of a haloalkane.

Ans: -It only contains single bonds. There is free rotation about single bonds, hence no cis-trans isomers exist

9. Given a reaction between HBr and 3-methylhex-3-ene and HBr. Someone said that the product obtained is optically active? Is he correct?

Ans: No. A racemate is formed.

Common misconceptions/other tips/points to note:
1. If either one of the doubly-bonded carbon atom is attached to two identical atoms or groups of atoms, there will be no cis-trans isomers.
2. A mixture of equalmolar of 2 enantiomers is called a racemic mixture/racemate. Such a mixture is optically inactive (optical rotations of 2 enantiomers cancel each other).
3. Cis-trans isomers: bond-polarities of ~ can/cannot cancel out each other -> polar/non-polar -> v.d.w.

Chapter 44 -- Typical reactions of various functional groups
1. State which of the 2 alkenes is the major dehydration product. Explain your answer.

Ans: The C=C bond in ~ is more substituted, making it more stable than ~, so it is the major product.

2. Explain why preparaing CH3CH2I by reacting CH3CH2OH with a mixture of NaI(s) and conc. H2SO4 is not appropriate.

Ans: -The HI (g) formed will be oxidized by conc. H2SO4 to iodine (H2SO4 + NaI -> NaHSO4 + HI; HI + H2SO4 -> 4H2O + H2S + 4I2)
     -Appropriate method: reflux a mixture of sodium iodide and conc. phosphoric acid/ red P and iodine

3. Suggest why high temperature can facilitate the formation of amide in the conversion of carboxylic acid to amide.

Ans: It removes water which converts the salt to amide.

4. Explain why the reaction is carried out under reflux. (Ans: To prevent loss of reactants and products by evaporation)

5a) A student attempted to prepare butan-1-ol using 1-fluorobutane instead of 1-bromobutane as the reactant. Suggest why the reaction would proceed at a slower rate.
Ans: 1-fluorobutane reacts slower because C-F bond is stronger than C-Br bond as a result of smaller atomic size of F.

5b) The rates of hydrolysis of chloroethane, bromoethane and iodoethane are different. Describe how you would monitor the reaction rates and explain why they react at different rates.
Ans: -Put 3 sols. (each with 2cm3 of ethanol, 1cm3 of AgNO3(aq)) into diff test tubes in water bath at 60°C. Add 5 drops of ~ separately to the test tubes
     -A general equation for the hydrolysis is CH3CH2-X + H2O -> CH3CH2-OH + H+ - X-
     -AgNO3 (aq) is used to follow the rate of hydrolysis of the haloalkanes. Halide ions produced from the hydrolysis would form a precipitate with silver ions (Ag+(aq) + X-(aq) -> AgX(s))
     -Rate of hydrolysis is related to how easily the C-X bond breaks
     -Strength of bonds: C-I < C-Br < C-Cl. C-I bonds breaks more readily, so its rate of hydrolysis is highest. The precipitate appears first in the test tube containing it.
     -C-Cl is most difficult to break, so the rate of hydrolysis of chloroethane is the lowest

6a)  In the distilling ethanol with acidified potassium dichromate sol. in a simple distillation setup, why is the organic product more likely to be ethanal.
Ans: Ethanal is more volatile than ethanol, so ethanal formed is distilled off. Partial oxidation of ethanol occurs.

6b) Why is product more likely to be ethanoic acid using a reflux setup, referring to q6a?
Ans: Since the sol. mixture is heated under reflux, volatile compounds cannot escape. Ethanol is completely oxidized into ethanoic acid.

7. Why is butan-2-ol classified as a secondary alcohol? (Ans: There are 2 alkyl groups attached to the atom bearing the -OH group.)

8. List the common errors in a simple distillation setup.

Ans: -Water should go in from the bottom instead of the top outlet of the condenser
     -Missing jacket on the condenser
     -Missing stopper at the top of the flask

9. What type of reaction is conversion of ethanol to ethanal? Justify your answer by considering their formulae.

Ans: Oxidation. H atoms are lost when ethanol is converted to ethanal.

10. Draw the a) reflux setup b) simple distillation setup c) dehydration of alcohol with Al2O3 (s)

11. Explain why ethyl ethanoate can dissolve iodine but canont dissolve sodium iodide.

Ans: -Iodine: simple molecular structure, molecular held together by weak v.d.w.
     -NaI: giant ionic structure, ions held together by strong ionic bonds
     -Strength of inter-particle attraction in ethyl ethanoate is comparable to that of iodine

12. Suggest amount of acid required for the hydrolysis of 1 mol of an ester. Explain your answer.

Ans: A very small amount of H+(aq). H+ acts as a catalyst and it is continuously regenerated.

13. What is Markovnikov's rule? 

Ans: It states that the H atom in HX is added to the C atom of the C-C double bond that already has the greater number of H atoms.

Common misconceptions/tips/points to note:
1. We can replace ammonia with an amine in the conversion of a carboxylic acid to an amide (in addition to adding PCl3).
2. Note that teritary alcohols cannot be oxidized (dichromate solution does not change colour upon heating with it).
3. Cold, dilute KMnO4/OH-(aq) should be used for reactions, while KMnO4/H+ can be used for detection of chemicals. 
   (KMnO4/H+ is strongly oxidizing and oxidizes alcohols formed into aldehydes or carboxylic acids)

Chapter 45 -- Inter-conversions of carbon compounds
1. (Element Ch11 q90a) Explain why it is dangerous to use the above set-up to carry out simple distillation. Suggest a modification.

Ans: -It is dangerous to carry out the exp. in a closed system. Pressure will build up due to expansion of gases, resulting in an explosion.
     -Add a receiver adaptor between the condenser and the round bottomed flask

2. (Element Ch11 q91a) The crude product of 2-chloro-2-methylpropane is wahed with 10% NaHCO3(aq). Outline the exp procedures with safety precautions.

Ans: -Add slowly 10% NaHCO3(aq). Wait until no effervescence occurs.
     -Stopper and shake the separating unnel vigourously and relieve any internal pressure built inside the funnel immediately
     -Add a drop of water to the funnel to identify the aqueous layer. Remove the the aqueous layer.

3. Suggest one advantage of using a separating funnel to carry out the exp.

Ans: Allow easy siolation of product by draining out the lower layer from the ~

4a) Outline the procedures to isolate the ester formed from reaction between alcohol and carboxylic acid.
Ans: -Shake mixture with NaHCO3(aq) in a separating funnel until no more gas is evolved
     -Extract the ester from the mixture using ether 
     -Remove ether by simple distillation

4b) Suggest why the alcohol should not be used in excess in this preparation.
Ans: It is difficult to remove the alcohol from the ester as both substances do not react with alkali/ their difference in b.p. is small.

5. In the preparation of iodoethane using red P, iodine and ethanol, explain why iodine is added is small portions and over a period of time.

Ans: The reaction is highly exothermic and vigourous. 

6. State the possible consequence of a) running off the lower layer from a separating funnel without removing the stopper. 
                                     b) using an excess of a hot solvent to dissolve the crude solid product during re-crystallization.

a) Ans: Without releasing the pressure, the liquid in the separating funnel will not dragin out of the funnel.
b) Ans: The product may not separate out as crystals if too much solvent is used.

7. Outline the procedure for purification of crude product with colour impurities by recrystallization from an ethanol-water mixture.

Ans: -Dissolve the crude product in minimum volume of hot ethanol-water mixture
     -Heat the solution with activated charcoal to remove colour impurities
     -Filter the hot mixture
     -Allow the filtrate to cool to room temp. to obtain ~

8. (Element Ch11 q110b) Outline an experimental procedure based on a solvent extract process to isolate pure heptanoic acid from hexa-3-one.

Ans: -Add ether and dilute NaOH (aq), shake in a separation funnel
     -Upper organic layer (ether) contains hexa-3-one, lower aqueous layer contains CH3(CH2)5CO2-Na+ (sodium salt)
     -Separate the two layers
     -Add dilute HCl (excess mineral salt) to regenerate CH3(CH2)5CO2H
     -Extract with ether and distill ether to obtain pure heptanoic acid

9. Can alkaline potassium permanganate solution be used instead of the acidified version in the reacion with prenol to give acid? Why? (Prenol is a primary alcohol with C=C)

Ans: No. If ~ is used, prenol will undergo addition reaction but not oxidiation with alkaline KMnO4 (aq) to give ~ instead.
