Chapter 9 – Structure and property of substances

1. Define chemical bonds, ionic bonds, covalent bonds, metallic bonds & empirical formula.

2. Describing bonds and forces within a structure. (e.g. Iodine crystal, NH4Cl)

3. Explain the melting point/boiling point of a substance. (Hint: structure, forces, energy)

4. Explain why a substance is soft or hard. (Hint: identify types of forces within the structure)

5. Explain why a substance conducts/does not conduct electricity. (Hint: no mobile ions, delocalized electrons)

6. Explain why substance is soluble/insoluble in water/non-aqueous solvents.

e.g. Why is diamond insoluble in water?

Ans: The covalent bonds between carbon molecules in the lattice are much stronger than the intermolecular forces between water molecules. (The weak attractive forces between carbon atoms and water molecules are not strong enough to overcome the attractive forces between carbon atoms)

e.g. Why is sodium chloride soluble in water?

Ans: The attractive forces between water molecules are similar than that of ions in the lattice. There is enough energy for new attraction forces to form between water molecules and ions.

7. Explain why ionic compounds are brittle. 

Ans: Cations and anions are held together by a strong ionic bond. Relative movement of the ions can bring ions of the same charge close together, which results in repulsion.

8. Explain why the structures of caesium chloride and sodium chloride differ. 

Ans: A caesium ion has a larger size than a sodium ion. More chloride ions surround each caesium ion as a result.

9. What are allotropes?

Ans: Allotropes are two (or more) forms of the same element in which the atoms or
molecules are arranged in different ways.

10. Draw the structures of NaCl, CsCl, diamond and graphite.

11. Suggest the applications of diamond and graphite.

12. Explain why graphite is soft.

Ans: The layers of carbon atoms are held by weak intermolecular forces, which means the layers readily slide over each other. 

13. What is an electric current? Which direction does it flow in a circuit? (Hint: electrons flow from negative to positive)

14. Describe the structure of metal. (e.g. copper)

Ans: In copper, the atoms are closely packed to form a giant metallic structure. (1) 
Each copper atom loses its outermost shell electrons to form cation. (1) 
A metallic bond is formed between positive metal ions and delocalized electrons in the structure. (1)

15. Why are metals good conductor of heat?

Ans: When a piece of metal is heated, the delocalized electrons get more energy and move faster, which collides with the neighbouring electrons. Heat is transferred in the collisions.

16. Why do metals have high densities? (Ans: Metal ions are packed closely together)

17. Why are metals malleable and ductile? (e.g. copper)

Ans: The layers of positively charged metallic ions slide over each other when copper is
hammered. (Non-directional metallic bonds still hold the metal ions together.) New metallic bonds are re-formed.

18. Predict the formula, structure, physical properties of compounds.

19. Why is the melting point of ionic compounds generally lower than that of covalent compounds?

Ans: A larger amount of energy is needed to break lots of strong covalent bonds between the atoms in a giant covalent structure than to break many strong ionic bonds between the ions in a giant ionic structure.

20. Identify the formula of a compound by its structure. (HARD)

Common mistakes/misconceptions
1. Ionic compounds decompose when it turns to molten state (metallic compounds don’t)
2. Gas/liquid cannot be ‘hard’ or ‘soft’

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 10 – Occurrence and extraction of metals

1. What are the uses of metals? Explain such use. (BROAD)

e.g.
a) Iron – construction, transport, ∵. Hard, strong, malleable and ductile, cheap
b) Copper – electrical wires, ∵. Electrical conductor, ductile, corrosion resistant
c) Aluminium – power cables, ∵Electrical conductor, low density, ductile, cheaper

Tips: 
-The reasons are closely related to the properties of the metal.
-Other inc.: corrosion resistant, non-poisonous, low density, light but strong, excellent reflective quality

2. Why are most metals found as compounds on Earth?

Ans: Most metals are too reactive to exist on their own. They react with other elements and form ores.

3. Identify the name/formula/chemical name of this ore. (BROAD)

e.g.
a) Bauxite = Al2O3
b) Zinc = Zinc blende
c) Haematite = Iron (III) oxide

4. Describe the relation between the discovery of a metal and its ease of extraction.

Ans: The more easily a metal can be extracted, the earlier it was discovered.

5. Write down the word equation/chemical equation of the extraction of the ore: 

6. What is the role of carbon in the metal extraction. (Ans: It acts as a reducing agent)

7. What other substances can replace carbon in metal extraction. (Ans: Carbon monoxide, hydrogen gas)

8. Why can’t we extract iron in the school laboratory? 

Ans: The temp. of the Bunsen burner is not high enough (around 600-800 degrees Celsius)

9. Describe how iron is extracted in a blast furnace.

10. What is molten slag? (a by-product during the separation of molten steel, e.g. CaSiO3, which can be used for building materials)

11. Why should we not extract lead in the school laboratory?

Ans: Lead is poisonous and volatile.

12. Describe the process of the extraction of lead. (Hint: there are 2 stages)

13. Suggest a few ways to conserve metals. (3Rs)

14. Suggest a few problems with recycling.

15. Suggest the importance of recycling.

16. Why are some metals discovered early but rare in nature? 

17. Explain why magnesium cannot be extracted by heating magnesium oxide with carbon.

Ans: It is very reactive and forms the most stable oxide.

Hint: consider its ease of extraction (it might exist as a free element in nature) 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 11 – Reactivity of metals

1. What is reactivity?

2. What factors can be used to compare the reactivity of metals?

3. Write down the word/chemical equation of the reaction between metals and 
a) oxygen, b) water/steam, c) dilute acid (if any) (BROAD)

(Tip: remember inc. state symbol)

4. Why do the surfaces of very reactive metals turn from shiny to dull when exposed to air?

Ans: It reacts with oxygen in air. An oxide layer is formed on the surface of the metal.

5. How should we prevent these metals from reacting with air?

6. Write down the observations of the reaction between a) oxygen, b) water/steam, c) dilute acid and the following metals: (BROAD)

7. Draw the experiment setups of reactions between water/steam and 
a) calcium, b) magnesium

8. What is the milky suspension formed when calcium reacts with water? 

9a) Why does aluminium not seem to react with steam?

Ans: Aluminium metal is usually covered with a very thin layer of aluminium oxide. The oxide layer prevents the metal from further reaction.

9b). Why does the reaction between lead and dilute hydrochloric acid stop very soon?

Ans: Lead (II) chloride is insoluble in water, which covers the surface of the lead metal and prevent further reaction.

10. Write down the metal reactivity series.

11. Why is the atomic size of potassium larger than that of calcium?

Ans: Calcium has one more electron in the 4th electron shell. The nucleus of Ca contains one more positive charge than potassium. Therefore, there is a higher attractive force on the electron towards the nucleus in calcium.

12. Why does the reactivity of metals decrease across a period?

Ans: More energy is required for the atom to lose more electrons. (e.g. potassium is more reactive than calcium because it has one less valence electron, so it is easier to lose electrons, which means it has a higher reactivity)

13. Why does the reactivity of metals increase down a group?

Ans: The distance between the nucleus and the valence electron(s) of a metal atom becomes larger when it has more electron shells. As a result, the attractive forces between the nucleus and the outermost electrons becomes weaker, and the valence electrons are easily lost.

14. Given a table showing the results of several experiments. Arrange the metals in ascending/ descending order of reactivity and explain your answer.

Tip: Explain why ___ is the most/least reactive, then explain why __ is more reactive than __ if necessary

15. Describe your observation when zinc metal is dropped into copper (II) sulphate solution.

Ans: The zinc metal slowly dissolves to form colourless solution. Some reddish-brown solid forms on the zinc surface. The solution turns from blue to colourless.

16. Write down the ionic equation of the following reactions:

17. Predict, with reasoning, whether a reaction takes place in each of the following: (e.g. Magnesium is added to dilute hydrochloric acid)

Ans: Yes. Metals (Magnesium) react with dilute acid (hydrochloric acid) to form metal salt (magesnium chloride). (Incorrect: Magnesium is more reactive than hydrogen.)

18. State and explain the difference between the HCl and H2SO4 with calcium.

Ans: Calcium reacts with sulphuric acid to form insoluble calcium sulphate on its surface which stops the reaction

19: How do we compare the vigour of reactions between acid and metals? 

20. Can sodium be extracted in displacement reactions? Explain why.

Ans: No, because it is too reactive. It reacts with water in the solution, forms hydrogen gas, and results in an explosive reaction

21a) Suggest a way to extract copper from copper (II) chloride.

Ans: We can use magnesium metal and displace copper from copper (II) chloride.

21b) Is it suitable to use calcium to extract copper from copper (II) chloride? Why or why not?

Ans: No, because calcium reacts with water in the solution to form hydrogen gas.

22. State the observation when sodium reacts with water.

Ans: Sodium melts to form a silvery ball and moves about quickly on the water surface. In addition, it burns with a golden yellow flame. (X produce colourless gas)

23a) Suggest a method to distinguish between magnesium sulphate solution and zinc sulphate solution. State the expected observation(s).

Ans: Add a piece of magnesium to both solutions with magnesium sulphate and zinc sulphate. There is no observable change in magnesium sulphate solution.
     Mangesium dissolves in zinc sulphate solution to form a colourless solution and a black solid.

23b) Can we use aluminium in the above suggested method? Why?

Ans: No. Aluminium metal is usually coated with aluminium oxide, which prevents the aluminium to react with the other metal sulphate in aqueous solution. Fresh aluminium needs to be used,
     but is very difficult to extract in the laboratory as it is very reactive with oxygen.

24. Write down the observation for the reaction between zinc and copper (II) oxide.

Ans: The mixture glows, and it burns with a bluish green flame upon heating. Yellow solid is observed. 
     When the mixture cools down, some white solid and reddish brown solid is seen.


Common mistakes/misconceptions:

1. Remember to familiarize with state symbols in all reactions

2. If displacement reaction does not occur, it does not mean that the reaction has no observable change. 
    (e.g. zinc oxide + copper --heat--> white ZnO turns yellow, surface of copper metal turns black)

Chapter 12 -- Reacting Masses

1. Define relative atomic mass. (The weighted average of the isotopic masses of all isotopes of an element on the carbon-12 scale)

2. Find the molecular mass of sodium chloride.

Ans: NaCl is not a molecule so there is no molecular mass.

3. Given that the formula mass of calcium carbonate is 100.1. Find its molar mass.

4. What is a mole?

Ans: One mole of substance represent by a formula is the amount containing the same number of formula unit as the number of atoms in 12g of carbon-12.

5. What is the mathematical relationship between molar mass, moles, mass, formula units and Avogadro's constant.

6. Calculate the percentage by mass of an element in a compound.

7. State the definiton of a) empirical formula b) molecular formula c) structural formula

8. Determine the empirical formula (and molecular formula if any) of an unknown compound by finding its mass, number of moles or by using the percentage mass of its constitutent atoms.

9. Calculations based on equations. (e.g. mass required to react with sth completely, mass of sth produced)

10. Calculate the theoretical yield, actual yield and percentage yield of the following reactions.

Common mistakes/misconceptions/remarks:

1. The mass of X and X ion is same because the mass of electron is negligible.

2. Ionic compounds don't have molecular formula

Chapter 13 -- Corrosion of Metals and their Protection

1. What is corrosion of metal? (Ans: te slow reaction of a metal with air, water or other substance in the environment)
 
2. What is the nature of the corrosion of metal?

Ans:
    - usually destructive by converting metals into oxides
    - sometimes constructive (e.g. sacrificial protection)
 
3. Provide an example of a metal that corrodes easily and one that never corrodes
 
4. What is rusting, what are the conditions for it to occur?
 
5. In the experiment to find the conditions of rusting, what is the use of a) anhydrous calcium chloride b) layer of oil c) boiled distilled water 

Ans:
    a) It acts as a drying agent, removing moisture from air, tests whether H2O is necessary rusting
    b) It prevents oxygen from dissolving in water, tests whether oxygen is necessary for rusting
    c) It does not contain dissolved oxygen as dissolved gases are removed during boiling, tests whether oxygen is necessary
 
6. Describe the process of rusting and write the chemical equations for the reactions that occur

Ans:
    - Iron loses electrons to form iron (ii) ions
    - The dissolved oxygen and water accept the elections to form hydroxide ions
    - The iron (ii) ions and hydroxide ions formed combine to form insoluble iron (ii) hydroxide (s) (green)
    - Insoluble iron (ii) hydroxide reacts with dissolved oxygen and water to form iron (iii) hydroxide (s) (yellow/ brown)
    - Iron (iii) hydroxide changes to hydrated iron (iii) oxide, which is rust, a reddish brown solid
    - Rusting continues until the iron piece corrodes completely
 
7. What is a half ionic equation?

Ans: An ionic equation which does not show substances that receives electrions
 
8. Why does rusting occur after a layer of rust forms on the surface of an iron object?

Ans: The layer of rust does not stick on the iron surface tightly so it does not act as a protective layer to prevent further reaction
 
9. What are the factors that speed up rusting?
 
10. What are electrolytes and how can they speed up rusting?
Ans: Substances that conduct electricity in molten or aqueous state and undergoes decomposition. They provide a conduction medium which allows iron to lose electrons more readily to form iron ions
 
11. How can we observe rusting using rust indicator?

Ans:
    - place an iron nail in a warm gel containing a rust indicator solution
    - the region near the head and tip of the nail turns blue which indicates the formation of iron (ii) ions (reacts with potassium hexacyanoferrate III)
    - the region near the body of the nail turns pink which indicates the formation of hydroxide ions (reacts with phenolphthalein)
 
12. What are the ways used to protect iron from rusting?
 
13. What is galvanised iron?
 
14. Is tin or zinc plating better to protect iron from rusting?

Ans:
    - Both tin and zinc can protect iron from water and oxygen when undamaged
    - Tin is cheaper and non-poisonous. However, the rate of rusting increases when the tin coating is damaged.
    - Zinc is more expensive and poisonous (may contaminate food). However, zinc still protects the iron from rusting after the zinc layer is damaged as zinc is more reactive than iron
 
15. What is electroplating and what are its advantages and disadvantages?

    - an electrical process in which a thin layer of metal (usually chromium) is plated on an object, which protects the object from contacting air and water
    - attractive/beautiful shiny appearance
    - high cost because electrolysis is invovled during the process, which requires electricity supply

16. Can a) magnesium b) copper be used as sacrificial protection?
 
17. What is an alloy?
    - a mixture of elements where at least 1 element is metal
 
18. Why is stainless steel corrosion resistant?
    - The layer of chromium (iii) oxide formed on the surface acts as a protective layer as it is impermeable to air and water
 
19. Compare the effectiveness of rusting prevention methods (plastic, painting, tin, electroplating, zinc, alloying)
 
20. Why is aluminium corrosion resistant? (Ans: a thin layer of aluminium oxide which is impermeable to oxygen and water is formed on the surface of Al)
 
21. How can we improve the corrosion resistance of aluminium? (Ans: Anodization, increase the thickness of the oxide layer)
 
22. Why can anodised aluminium be easily dyed?

Ans: Anodised aluminium have many pores left of the surface, which allows large organic molecules (dyes) to be easily trapped.

23. Other than corrosion resistance and dye, suggest one advantage of using aluminium to make cans.

Ans: Low density, malleable, easy to mould and recycle

24. In the test for rusting, what happens if a magnesium ribbon is wrapped around the iron nail?

Ans: Pink colour is observed because mangesium is more reactive and loses electrons more readily. The delocalized electrons then react with dissolved 
     oxygen and water to form hydroxide ions. Gas bubbles evolved because magnesium reacts with hot water to form hydrogen gas. However, no blue colour 
     is observed because iron atoms do not lose electrons to form iron (II) ions.

25. Consider iron cans coated with a thin layer of tin. Explain whether these cans would corrode more readily once their surfaces are damaged by scratching.

Ans: Iron cans would corrode more easily. As tin is less reactive than iron, iron loses electrons more readily. When the protective layer of tin is revmoved,
     iron is exposed to oxygen and water, which may lead to corrosion  

Chapter 14 -- Introduction to acids and alkalis

1. Name the acids present in a) citrus fruits b) soft drinks c) vitamin C d**) acid rain 

2. Name the definition and properties of acids.

Ans: 
-An acid is a molecular compound which forms hydrogen ions as the only cations when dissolved in water.
-Acid are electrolytes (mobile ions are present)
-Most acids have a sour taste
-They turn moist blue litmus paper red
-acid + metal --> metal salt + hydrogen     (for metals higher than copper in the metal reactivity series)
-acid + carboante --> salt + water + carbon dioxide       (effervescence occurs)
-acid + hydrogencarbonate --> salt + water + carbon dioxide
-acid + metal oxide/hydroxide --> salt + water (neutralization)

3. Name the definition and properties of alkalis

-Alkali is a substance which neutralize acids and is water-soluble (including slightly soluble)
-Alkalis are electrolytes
-They feel slippery
-Most alkalis have a bitter taste
-They turn moist red litmus paper blue
-alkali + acid --> salt + water (neutralization)
-alkali + carbon dioxide --> carbonate + water
-alkali + ammonium compound --> salt + ammonia + water
-alkali + metal salt --> metal hydroxides + metal compound

4. What is the definition of salt.

Ans: A compound formed by replacing hydrogen ion or ammonium ion in acid with metal ion.

5a) Describe the process for testing carbon dioxide.
5b) What happens when excess carbon dioxide is added to limewater. Write down the equations involved.

6. Why must acid be in aqueous state in order for it to show its acidic properties? (ionization)

Ans: When acid crystals dissolve in water, the molecules ionize to give hydrogen ions H+ (aq). All acidic properties are due to the presence of hydrogen ions.

7. Why does pure sulphric acid and nitric acid not show any acidic properties.

8. By using an equation, explain how baking powder makes cake spongy.

Ans: 2NaHO3 --> Na2CO3 + CO2 + H2O, carbon dioxide produced creates air spaces when it leaves the food which makes cake spongy

10. Explan how fizzy drink tablets work and how powder effervesce.

11. What is the basicity of acid?

12. Suggest some common types of bases and their usage in daily life if any.

13. Why does soil turn acidic?

Ans: 
-Acid rain contains pollutants such as sulphur dioxide and nitrous oxides which dissolve in water to form acids.
-Products formed by the decomposition of plants by microorgranisms are acidic

14. Name the properties of ammonia. (Ans: pungent smell, very volatile, water-soluble, less dense than air)

15. Name the colour of precipitate formed when different metal salts react with alkali.

16a) Design an experiment to test the reaction between alkali and an ammonium compound and to collect ammonia.
16b) Why do we lift the test tube in the above set-up suggested?

17. Which of the metal hydroxides redissolve in a) excess sodium hydroxide b) excess ammonia? Explain why.

18. Suggest 2 methods to distinguish between NaHCO3 (aq) and Na2CO3 (aq).

Ans:
Method 1: Add calcium chloride. Only white precipitate is formed in a solution containing Na2CO3.
Method 2: Add acid to both solutions. NaHCO3 absorbs heat whereas Na2CO3 releases heat.

19. Write down the chemical equation for the reaction between metal salt and ammonia. (e.g. FeCl2)

20. What is the difference between ionization and dissociation.

21. State the properties of concentrated HCl, H2SO4, HNO3. Explain why should be done if concentrated acid touches our skin.

HCl: colourless corrosive liquid that gives out white fumes in air
HNO3: turns yellow on storage due to presence of dissolved nitrogen dioxide formed from decomposition of some of the acid, oxidizing and very corrosive, decomposes under light
H2SO4: colourless oily liquid, has dehydrating and oxidizing property
Safety: Wash the affected area with plenty of water then with very dilute sodium hydrogencarbonate solution

22. State the properties of concentrated alkalis. Explain why should be done if concentrated alkali touches our skin.

NaOH, KOH: very corosive, attack the skin readily and stain it yellow or even black
Safety: place the affected area under slowly running cold water

23. Suggest some safety precautions when handling concentrated acids and alkalis.

24. Describe the process of the following experiments:
a) copper + concentrated nitric acid
b) sugar (sucrose) + concentrated sulphric acid

25. Explain how to prepare limewater in a laboratory with an experiment.

26. Explain how to distinguish between 3 solutions containing zinc ions, magnesium ions, and lead (II) ions respectively.

Common misconceptions/ other tips:
1. All group I metals, compoounds consisting of nitric ions or hydrogencarbonate ions are soluble in water
2. During ionization, the covalent bonds of acids are broken. (new charged particles formed)
3. Hydrogen ion combines with water molecules to form hydronium ion. (cannot exist alone in aqueous solution)
4. Most acids ionize while most alkalis dissociate in water. However, ammonia ionizes slightly to give ammonium and hydroxide ions. 
5. NH4OH does not exist as an ionic compound
6. H2SO4 has a dehyrating property = removes hydrogen and oxygen in the ratio 2:1 from the substance (drying agent: removes moisture)
    (e.g. glucose + conc. H2SO4 --> 6H2O + 6C) (black solid is formed)
7. Not all acids have hydrogen atoms as its constitutent particles
8. Ammonia gas is colourless and can be seen
9. Chlorine gas can react with NaOH to form NaClO, NaCl and H2O (remove OH- ions)
10. Remember to check if the acid is in aqeuous state or solid state 
11.
