Chapter 36 + 37 -- Rate of reaction (Unorganised)

1. What are the disadvantages of titrimetric analysis?

Ans: -It is very difficult to measure the change of concentration continuously
     -It cannot be used to study fast reactions because titrimetric analysis takes time

2. Name the apparatus used for measuring conductivity of a solution. (Ans: A conductometer)

3. State 2 advantages of using colourimetry in an experiment.

Ans: -Readings can be instantly obtained
     -Absorbance of a solution with low concentration can still be determined

4a) Consider a reaction between MnO4- and C2O42- (producing Mn2+, CO2, H2O). Suggest an explanation for the variation in MnO4 conc. obtained.

Ans: -The reaction of ~ is slow possibly because both ~ are negatively charged (repulsion)
     -It is likely that one of the products (Mn2+) is a catalyst for the reaction (autocatalysis)
     -The reaction is slow at the beginning because of the low concentration of Mn2+. When ~ builds up, the reaction proceeds rapidly
     -When MnO4- ions are almost used up, the rate slows down

4b) Suggest a method to show whether or not Mn2+ is a catalyst of the reaction.

Ans: -Repeat the experiment with a few drops of Mn2+ firstly added to the reaction mixture
     -Consumption of MnO4- ions will be faster at the beginning if ~ is added

5.

Chapter 38 -- Molar volume

1. Recall the following:
    a) What is a mole? (the amount of substance containing the same number of formula units as the number of atoms in exactly 12.0g of carbon-12)
    b) What is the Avogadro's constant? (the number of atoms in exactly 12.0g of carbon-12. Equal to 6.02x10^23 mol^-1)
    c) What is the molar mass of a substance? (its formula mass expressed in gram unit)

2. What is molar volume? How does it vary?

Ans: Molar volume is the volume occupied by one mole of substance. For solids and liquids, the molar volume varies depending on the size of particles
     and closeness of packing of particles. Molar volumes of gases at same temp. and pressure and roughly equal.

3. What is the Avogadro's law?

Ans: It states that equal volumes of all gases contain the same number of molecules at the same temperature and pressure.

Common misconceptions/other tips/points to note:
1. Pay attention to the state symbols and temperature of surroundings of a given reaction. 
   Volume of liquid (e.g. water) is ignored in calculations involving gas volume.
2. A (e.g. H2, hydrocarbon A) 'exploded' with B (e.g. O2, hydrocarbon B) means that the reaction is exothermic.
3. To calculate faster, we can draw a grid showing volume ratio (mole ratio) of different substances and their respective volumes, then do comparisons.
4. S.t.p is different from r.t.p., read the question carefully. (standard temperature is 0°C but room temperature is 25°C)
5. For questions involving combustion reactions, find how much excess oxygen is used up (the remaining oxygen should be taken into account in total gas volume).