Book 3B -- Redox Reactions, Chemical cells, and electrolysis

Chapter 28 -- Chemical cells in daily life

1. What is a chemical cell? What is electricity?

2. Suggest the ways to classify chemical cells.

3a) What are primary cells and secondary cells? Give a few examples of primary cells and secondary cells. 
3b) From the example stated in a, state its:
  i) electrodes
  ii) electrolytes
  iii) max voltage
  iv) shape
  v) voltage over discharge
  vi) approximate shelf life/rechargeability
  vii) average life time/rechargeability
  viii) conditions for use
  ix) uses
  x) advtanges 
  xi) disadvantages

4. What factors should be taken into account when choosing a dry cell?

5. Suggest 3 environmental impacts of disposing of chemical cells.

6a) What is meant by 'charge capacity' of a cell?
6b) What is meant by 'energy density' of a cell?

Chapter 29 -- Simple Chemical cells

1. How can a simple chemical cell be set up?

2. What is the difference between ions and electrons.

3a) In a Mg/Cu cell, which electrode is the positive or negative electrode? Explain your answer with reference to the E.C.S.
3b) What is the direction of electron flow through the external circuit?
3c) Write the half ionic equations and overall equation for the reactions involved.
3d) What are the observations at the two electrodes respectively?

4. Suggest 3 factors that affects the voltage of a simple chemical cell.

5. It is known that lemon, potato and grapes can be used as the electrolyte in a simple chemical cell, but watermelon cannot be used. Why?

6. What is electromotive force? What dose it imply about the tendency of losing electrons in a simple chemical cell?

Consider the case of a Mg/Cu cell
7a) Why is it not efficient to put both electrodes in the same container with electrolyte?
7b) What are the 2 main functions that the salt bridge serves?
7c) What kind of solution should the salt bridge be soaked in?
7d) Can the salt bridge be soaked in sodium hydroxide solution in the case of an Mg/Cu cell? Why or why not?

8a) What does is the purpose of adding a porous pot in some simple chemical cells?

Answer: It acts as a salt bridge which allows ions to move between the two solutions thorugh its small holes, so as to maintain the 
        electrical neutrality in two half cells.

8b) In a Daniell cell, what happens if no porous pot is used?

Answer: The 2 electrolytes are mixed together. There is direct transfer of electrons from Cu to Ag+. No electron flow to the external circuit.
        The reading of voltmeter is zero.

Common misconceptions/mistakes, tips:
1. SATURATED solution must be used in a salt bridge.
2. Lithium ion cells are relatively expensive. (but it is lightweight)

Chapter 30 -- Redox reactions

1. What is a redox reaction? Give a few examples of redox reactions.

2. How should we test for hydrgen sulphide? (Answer: use lead (ll) ethaonate paper, it turns shiny black)

3. Explain oxidation, reduction, oxidizing agents and reducing agents in terms of gain or loss of 
    a) oxygen b) hydrogen c) electrons d) increase/decrease of oxidation number

4. For the types of reaction below, state whether it is a redox reaction or not (or both in some cases).
    a) Combustion b) Neutralization c) Precipitation d) Displacement e) Decomposition f) Corrosion of metals

5. Define oxidation number.

6. List out:
  a) common oxidizing agents (10 in total)
  b) common reducing agents (7 in total)
  c) their half ionic equations
  d) observable change in the reaction (if any)

7. State the difference in observation between:
  a) Concentrated nitric acid added to aqueous and solid Fe2+ compounds
  b) Concentrated nitric acid added to sulphite ion solution/ sulphite ion solution added to concentrated nitric acid

8. Suggest a chemical test to test for the presence of sulphur dioxide gas. (Ans: test with a filter paper soaked with a suitable oxidizing agent like KMnO4-/H+)

9. Suggest 2 substances with a bleaching property.

10. Suggest the method of distinguishing Br2(aq) from I2(aq).

Answer: Add a non-aqueous solvent like heptane to both of the solutions. The heptane layer floats on the top and extracts most of the bromine or iodine form the bottom aqueous layer.
        Bromine is orange-red in the heptane layer while iodine is purple.

11. What does a 'disproportionation reaction' mean? (Ans: The reaction in which a species is simultaneously reduced and oxidized in called a ~)

12. Explain why household bleaching solution cannot be mixed with acid. (Ans: it reacts with form toxic chlorine gas)

Common misconceptions/mistakes, tips:
1. Oxidation numbers can be decimals.
2. Remember all the rules for counting oxidation numbers.
3. Oxidation number does not describe compounds, it only describes the charge of elements.
4. Do more exercises for balancing redox reaction, memorise all the reactant and products of common redox reactions, as well as the E.C.S to predict the feasibility of redox reactions

Chapter 31 -- Redox reactions in chemical cells

1.  What are inert electrodes?

2.  Instead of using two-half cells, can we mix the 2 electrolytes together into one half-cell? Why?

3. What is a fuel cell?

4. In a fuel cell, what are the 2 uses of the porous nickel electrodes?

5. Suggest the a) advantages b) disadvantages c) uses of the hydrogen fuel cell.

6. Why are fresh potatoes used in the set-up of a chemical cell?

Answer: Fresh potato contains more water. More mobile ions are present for the conduction of electricity.

Common misconceptions/mistakes, tips:
1. Current flows in the opposite direction as electrons.
2. When determining the feasibilty of a chemical cell: (HW Q3 MC)
 a) Compare the ECS positions of the solutions in two half-cells .
  (e.g. if MgSO4 acts as the reducing agent, no cell reaction will occur because its reducing property is very weak)
 b) Compare the ECS position of the electrode and the solution in a half-cell
  (e.g. Cu is a stronger reducing agent than FeSO4, so electrons do not flow through the external circuit from the FeSO4 half-cell)
