Chapter 33 -- Energy changes in chemical reactions

1. What is the law of conservation of energy?

2. What is the difference between the change in internal energy and enthalpy change?

3. How can we calculate the enthalpy change of a chemical reaction?

4. What is an exothermic and endothermic reaction? 

Ans: Exothermic reaction is one that gives out heat, while endothermic reaction is one that takes in heat (to the surroundings).

5. Is the breaking of bonds/forming of bonds a exothermic or endothermic reaction? (Answer: Bond-breaking: endothermic, Bond-forming: exothermic)

6. Calculate the enthalpy change for the following reaction. (Total bond enthalpy of products - total bond enthalpy of reactants)

7. Explain why exothermic reaction has negative enthalpy change. 

Ans: Since the total enthalpy of products is less than the total enthalpy of reactants, the enthalpy of the system decreases. 
     (E taken in by bond breaking < E given out by bond forming)

Common misconceptions/other tips/points to note:
1. System: refers to the reactants and products of the reaction; Surroundings: refers to everything outside the system

Chapter 34 -- Standard enthalpy changes of reactions

1. What are the standard conditions for measuring enthalpy changes? (Hint: pressure, temperature, concentration)

2a) Define standard enthalpy change of reaction.    
    (Ans: The enthalpy change when the no. of moles of reactants represented by the thermochemical equation react completely under standard conditions.)
2b) Define standard enthalpy change of combustion.
    (Ans: The enthalpy change when one mole of the required substance is completely burnt in oxygen under standard conditions.)
2c) Define standard enthalpy change of neutralization.
    (Ans: The enthalpy change when one mole of water is formed from neutralization between an acid and an alkali under standard conditions.)
2d) Define standard enthalpy change of formation.
    (Ans: The enthalpy change when one mole of the required substance is formed from its constituent elements in their standard states under standard conditions.)

3. Are the following reactions exothermic or endothermic? 
   a) Combustion b) Neutralization c) Formation d) Precipitation e) Displacement f) Freezing/condensation g) Thermal decomposition h) Ionization of weak acid/alkali i) Melting/vaporization

4. Why will there be less energy released if a weak acid and a weak alkali is used?

Ans: Some energy has to be supplied for the ionization of weak acid or alkali. (state how much heat energy in kJ mol^-1 is absorbed when necessary)

5. Why are expanded polystyrene cups often used to carry out calorimetric experiments? 

Ans: They are good insulators of heat and helps minimize heat loss from the reaction mixture to the surroundings.

6a) Name 5 common sources of errors (and improvements) in calorimetric experiments.

Ans: -Heat loss to surroundings
     -Heat capacities of polystyrene cup/thermometer were not taken into account
     -Specific heat capacity of reaction mixture != that of water
     -Density of reaction mixture != that of water
     -Exp. not carried out under standard conditions

6b) Name 4 common assumptions made in calorimetric experiments.

Ans: -All solutions have same density as water
     -All solutions have same specific heat capacity as water
     -No heat loss to surroundings (especially for slow reactions, assume it is very fast)
     -Heat capacity of the apparatus is negligibly small

7. Why can't the standard enthalpy change of formation be determined?

Ans: -Some formation reactions are highly exothermic and cannot be safely carried out
     -The constituent elements are in different physical states and cannot be mixed well in a calorimeter
     -Side reactions may lead to formation of side products

8a) What does ΔHf measure in terms of energetic stability? 
    
Ans: ΔHf of a compound is a measure of energetic stability with respect to the elements from which is formed

8b) In terms of energetic stability, what does the negative value of ΔHf of water imply? (Ans: Water is energetically more stable than its constituent elements under standard conditions.)

9. Draw a setup for a calorimetric experiment. (thermometer, lid, polystyrene cups/vaccum flask, stirrer)

10. How can we find the maximum temperature change for relatively slow reactions? (Ans: By extrapolation from a temperature/time graph)

Common misconceptions/other tips/points to note:
1. Sign of ΔH is reversed when the chemical equation is reversed.
2. The strength of an acid can be determined be the ΔHn (the smaller the magnitude, the weaker the acid/alkali)
3. The standard enthalpy changes of formation of all elements in their standard states are zero.
4. Enthalpy level diagram: y-axis = enthalpy, x-axis = reaction coordinate, 2 horizontal lines representing total enthalpy of reactants/products\
5. Bomb calorimeter: prevents formation of soot particles or CO during carbon combustion
6. For elements with allotropes, the most energetically stable allotrope (e.g. graphite) is used to define ΔHf

Chapter 35 -- Hess's law
