Chapter 9

1. Chemical bond refers to the electrostatic attraction that holds particles together.
   Ionic bond refers to the strong, non-directional electrostatic force between oppositely charged ions.
   Covalent bond refers to the strong, directoinal electrostatic force between shared electrons and the bonded nuclei.
   Metallic bond refers to the non-directoinal electrostatic force between delocalized electrons and metal ions.
   Empirical formula shows the simplest whole number ratio of atoms or ions present in a compound.

2. The nitrogen and hydrogen atoms in the ammonium ion are held by covalent bonds. The ammonium ion and chloride ion are held by ionic bonds.

3. Ammonium chloride has a giant ionic structure. The ammonium ion and chloride ion are held by strong ionic bonds. Much energy
   is required to separate the ions.

4. Diamond is hard because the cabron atoms are bonded by strong covalent bond in a giant covalent structure. It is not easy to separate the atoms.

5. Sodium chloride does not conduct electricity in solid state because the ions are not mobile. The ions become mobile when sodium chloride
   is molten or in aqueous solution because the ions turn mobile. 
   Diamond does not conduct electricity because there are no mobile ions or delocalized electrons.

6. The attractive forces between sodium ion and chloride ion is much stronger than the attractive forces between molecules in non-aqueous solvents,
   so the weak attractive forces between the molecules cannot overcome the strong attractive forces between ions, and new attraction forces cannot 
   be formed.

7. Cations and anions are held together by strong ionic bond. When a force is exerted, relative movements of ions bring ions of the same charge close
   together, thus resulting in repulsion.

8. The atomic size of caesium is larger than sodium. More chloride ions surround one caesium ion as a result.

9. Allotropes are two or more forms of the same element in which the atoms and molecules are arranged in different ways.

10. 

11. Diamond can be used for jewellery and glasscutter. Graphite can be sued as a lubricating oil in high temperatures or pencil lead.

12. Graphite is soft because the layers of carbon atoms are only held by weak Van der Waals' forces, which means the layers readily slide over each other.

13. Electric current is a flow of charged particles.

14. In copper metal, the atoms are closely packed to form a giant metallic structure. Each atom loses its outermost shell electron to form cation.
    A metallic bond is formed between positive metal ions and delocalized electrons in the structure.

15. When metal is heated, the delocalized electrons get more energy and move faster, which collide with neighbouring electrons more frequently. 
    Heat is transferred in these collisions.

16. Metal have high densities because the metal ions are packed closely together.

17. When a force is exerted on the metal, the layers of positively charged metal ions slide over each other readily. Non-directional metallic bonds still hold 
    the metal ions together. New metallic bonds are re-formed and the metal takes on a new shape.

18. 

19. The energy required to break lots of strong covalent bonds between atoms in a giant covalent structure is more than that to break strong ionic bonds betwee 
    ions in a giant ionic structure.

20.

Chapter 10

1. Iron can be used for transport, construction and magnets because it is magnetic, cheap, malleable and ductile, hard and strong.
   Copper can be used for electrical wires because its electrical conductivity is excellent, and it is corrosion resistant and ductile.
   Aluminium can be used as overhead wire cabels because it electrical conductivity is very good, and it is less dense and expensive than copper.
   Gold can be used as a shield for heat because it has excellent reflective quality.
   Mercury is used in thermometers because it expands on heating, is liquid at room temperautre, and does not wet walls of tubes.

2. Most metals are found as compounds on Earth because they are too reactive to exist on their own. They react with other elements to form ores.

3. Salt, limestone, magnesite, bauxite, zinc blende, haematite, magnetite, copper pyrite, galena, cinnbar, argenite

4. The earlier the discovery of a metal, the easier the extraction method.

5. Galena (lead (II) sulphide) reacts with oxygen to form lead (II) oxide, which is extracted as lead metal by burning the oxide with carbon

6. It acts as a reducing agent.

7. Carbon monoxide or hydrogen gas.

8. The temperature of the Bunsen Burner is not higher enough.

9. First, a mixture of iron, limestone and coke is put in the blast furnance. Hot air is blasted into the furnance, oxygen reacts with coke to form carbon
   monoxide, which is a reducing agent. Carbon monoxide then removes the oxygen in iron (III) oxide, producing iron metal. Limestone helps removes unwanted 
   impurities, like silica/silicon dioxide. Calcium oxide forms calcium silicate upon reacting with silica and is removed as molten slag.

10. Molten slag is a by-product during the separation of molten steel. It can used for building materials.

11. Lead is poisonous and volatile.

12. Lead (II) sulphide is burnt in air and reacts with oxygen to form lead (II) oxide. Then, lead (II) oxide is burnt with carbon, which produces lead metal 
    and carbon dioxide.

13. Reduce metal articles, recycling used metals, and reducing the use of metal,

14. The separation of metal in metal waste is difficult and time-consuming. Besides, the cost of melting and purifying the metal is high in HK.

15. Recycling saves energy and metal resources, and it helps reduce pollution.

16. The metals may exist as a free element in nature, or the extraction method is simple due to its low reactivity.

17. It is because magnesium is very oxide and forms the most stbale oxide.

Chapter 11

1. Reactivity is the readiness to react.

2. The higher the rate of reaction, the more reactive the metal. The lower the temperature needed to start the reactio, the more reactive the metal. The more
   energy is released in the reaction, the more reactive the metal.

3. metal + oxygen --> metal oxide (only for mercury or above, burns for iron or above)
   metal + water --> metal hydroxide + hydrogen gas (only for calcium or above)
   metal + steam --> metal oxide + hydrogen gas (only for iron or above)
   metal + dilute acid --> metal salt + hydrogen gas (only for lead or above)

4. The metal reacts with oxygen in the air. An oxide layer is formed on the surface of the metal.

5. We shold store it under paraffin oil (potassium + sodium) or in an airtight container (calcium).

6. 

7. 

8. Calcium hydroxide is formed during the reaction between calcium and water. It appears as milky suspension because it is only slightly soluble in water.

9a) Aluminium metal is usually covered with a very thin layer of aluminium oxide. The oxide layer prevents the metal from further reaction.

9b) Lead (II) chloride is insoluble in water, which covers the surface of the lead metal and stop further reaction.

10. potassium, sodium, calcium, magnesium, aluminium, zinc, iron, lead, copper, mercury, silver, gold

11. Calcium has one more electron in the 4th electron shell than potassium. The nucleus of calcium contains one more protin than potassium. Therefore, there
    is a higher attractive force on the electron towards the nucleus in calcium.

12. There are more electrons in the outermost electron shell of an element across the period. More energy is required to lose the electron.

13. The distance between the nucleus and the outermost shell electrons increase down a group because it has more electron shells. The attractive forces between
    the nucleus and the outermost shell electrons becomes weaker, and the valence electrons are easily lost.

14. 

15. Zinc metal dissolves to form a colourless soluion. Reddish brown solid is formed on the zinc surface. The solution turns from blue to colourless.

16.

17.

18. Calcium reacts with sulphuric acid to form insoluible calcium sulphate on its surface which stops the reaction.

19. We can compare the vigour fo reactions by the energy released in the reaction. The hotter the solution the more reactive the metal.

20. No, because sodium is too reactive. It reacts with water in the solution, forms hydrogen gas, and results in an explosive reaction.

21a) Add magnesium to copper (II) chloride solution. Magnesium displaces copper copper (II) chloride to form magnesium (II) chloride and copper metal.

21b) No, because calcium reacts with water to form hydrogen gas. 

22. Sodium metal to form a silvery ball, floats and moves around quickly on the water surface, burns with a golden yellow flame, 
    and dissolves to form a colourless solution.

23a) Add a piece of magnesium to both solutions. There is no reaction and observable change between magnesium and the magnesium sulphate solution. However,
     magnesium dissolves in zinc sulphate solution to form a colourless solution and a black solid.

23b) No, because aluminium is usually coated with a thin layer of aluminium oxide, which prevents the metal from reacting with other metal sulphate in aqueous
     solution. Fresh aluminium needs to be used, but it is very diffficult to extract in the laboratory as it is reactive with oxygen.

24. The mixture glows, and it burns with a bluish green flame upon heating. Yellow solid (zinc oxide) is observed. When the mixture cools down, some white solid
    and reddish brown solid is seen.

Chapter 12

1. Relative atomic mass is the weighted average of isotopic masses of all naturally occuring isotopes of an element on the carbon-12 scale.

2. Sodium chloride is not a molecule so there is no molecular mass.

3. The molar mass of a substance is numerically the same as its formula mass, so the molar mass of calcium carbonate is 100.1 as well.

4. One mole of substance represented by a formula is the amount containing the same number of formula unit as the number of atoms in 12g of carbon 12.

5. mole = mass / molar mass, mole = no. of formula units / Avogadro's constant

7a) Empirical formula is the formula which shows the simplest whole number ratio of atoms or ions present.
7b) Molecular formula is the formula which shows the actual number of atoms in one molecule of the substance.
7c) Structural formula is the formula which shows how the constitutent atoms are joined up in the substances.

Chapter 13

1. Corrosion of metals refers to the slow reaction between a metal with air, water or other substances in the environment.

2. It is usually destructive by converting metals into oxides. It is sometimes constructive.

3. Potassium is very reactive and corrodes easily, while gold is unreactive and never corrodes.

4. Rusting is the corrosion of iron. It takes place when iron is exposed to oxygen in air and water.

5a) Anhydrous calcium chloride acts as a drying agent and removes moisture in the air. It tests whether water is needed during rusting.
5b) The layer of oil prevents gases in the air from dissolving in the boiled distilled water. It tests whether oxygen is needed during rusting.
5c) It has no dissolved oxygen as gases are removed during boiling. It tests whether oxygen is needed during rusting.

6. First, iron atoms loses electrons to form iron (II) ions. Secondly, dissolved oxygen and water accept the electrons to form hydroxide ions. Then, iron (II) ions
   react with hydroxide ions to form iron (II) hydroxide. Next, iron (II) hydroxide reacts with dissoled oxygen and water to form iron (III) hydroxide. Finally, 
   iron (III) hydroxide changes to hydrated iron (III) hydroxide, a reddish brown solid, which is known as rust. Rusting continues until the iron corrodes completely.

7. An ionic equation which does not show the substances that receive electrons.

8. The layer of rust does not stick onto the surface of the iron tightly so it does not act as a protective layer to prevent further reaction.

9. -Presence of acidic pollutants or electrolytes
   -Increased temperature
   -Attached to a less reactive metal
   -Scratched, bent or sharp area 

10. Electrolytes are substances that conduct electricity in molten or aqueous state. They provide a conduction medium for the transfer of electrons. Iron loses electrons
    more readily to form iron (II) ions as a result.

11. Place an iron nail in a warm gel containing rust indicator solution. Blue colour indicates that iron (II) ions are present, as it reacts with potassium hexacyanoferrate (III). 
    Pink colour indicates that hydroxide ions are present, as it reacts with phenolphthalein. 

12. Painting, applying oil and grease, plastic covering, surface protection like tin plating, electroplating, sacrificial protection like zinc plating, cathodic protection, and alloying.

13. Galvanized iron is iron covered with a layer of zinc on its surface.

14. When undamaged, both tin and zinc can protect iron from rusting. When damaged, only zinc can protect iron from rusting, because it is more reactive than iron and loses electrons
    more readily. However, zinc plating more expensive and is poisonous. Tin plating is cheaper and non-poisonous, but the rate of rusting increases when the tin coating is damaged.

15. Electroplating is a electrical process in which a thin layer of metal is coated on the surface of an object, which prevents it from contacting air and water. Advtanges:
    beautiful shiny appearance; Disadvantages: high cost because electrolysis is invovled in the process, which requires electricity supply

16a) Magnesium can be used a sacrificial protection. It is more reactive than iron and loses electrons more readily, so magnesium corrodes instead of iron.
16b) Copper cannot be used a sacrificial protection. It is less reactive than iron and causes iron to lose electrons more readily, so iron corrodes faster.

17. A mixture of different metals in which at least one element is a metal.

18. The layer of chromium (III) oxide formed on the iron surface acts as a protective layer.

19. alloying > zinc > electroplating/tin > painting (on clean surface) > plastic/painting (on rust)

20. Aluminium is usually covered with a layer of aluminium oxide which is impermeable to oxygen and water, thus preventing rusting.

21. Anodization, which increases the thickness of the aluminium oxide layer on the aluminium surface.

22. Anodized aluminium has many pores on its surface, which allows large organic molecules like dyes to be easily trapped.

23. Low density, malleable, easy to mould and recycle.

24. Pink colour is observed because magnesium loses electrons readily. The dissolved oxygen and wataer accept the electrons to form hydroxide ions, which reacts with phenolphthalein.
    Gas bubbles evovled because magnesium reacts with hot water to form hydrogen gas. However, no blue colour is observed because iron atoms do not lose electrons to form iron (II) ions.

25. Yes. Tin acts a protective layer which prevent oxygen and water from contacting iron and start rusting. However when the tin layer is removed, iron is exposed to air and water, which
    leads to corrosion.

Chapter 14

1. Citrus fruit: citric acid    Soft drinks: carbonic acid      Vitamin C = ascorbic acid       acid rain: sulphuric acid and nitric acid

2. 
-An acid is a molecular compound which forms hydrogen ions as the only cations when dissolved in water.
-Acid are electrolytes (mobile ions are present)
-Most acids have a sour taste
-They turn moist blue litmus paper red
-acid + metal --> metal salt + hydrogen     (for metals higher than copper in the metal reactivity series)
-acid + carboante --> salt + water + carbon dioxide       (effervescence occurs)
-acid + hydrogencarbonate --> salt + water + carbon dioxide
-acid + metal oxide/hydroxide --> salt + water (neutralization)

3. 
-Alkali is a substance which neutralize acids and is water-soluble (including slightly soluble)
-Alkalis are electrolytes
-They feel slippery
-Most alkalis have a bitter taste
-They turn moist red litmus paper blue
-alkali + acid --> salt + water (neutralization
-alkali + carbon dioxide --> carbonate + water
-alkali + ammonium compound --> salt + ammonia + water
-alkali + metal salt --> metal hydroxides + metal compoun

4. A compound formed by replacing hydrogen ion or ammonium ion in acid with metal ion.

5. Test with limewater. Limewater turns milky in presence of carbon dioxide, which turns colourless when CO2 is in excess.
    CO2 + Ca(OH)2 --> CaCO3 + H2O       CaCO3 + CO2 + H2O --> Ca(HCO3)2

6. When acid crystals dissolve in water, the molecules ionize to give hydrogen ions H+ (aq). All acidic properties are due to the presence of hydrogen ions.

7. No hydrogen ions are present.

8. 2NaHCO3 --> Na2CO3 + CO2 + H2O, carbon dioxide produced creates air spaces when it leaves the food which makes cake spongy

No question 9 

10. Fizzy drink tablets contain a solid acid and sodium hydrogencarbonate. When it is dissolved in water, the solid acid ionizes in water to form H+ (aq).
   H+ (aq) reacts with NaHCO3 to form CO2.

11. The basicity of an acid is the maximum number of hydrogen ions produced by one molecule of an acid.

12. Sodium hydroxide: foundin drain cleaners and oven cleaners
    Ammonia: found in window cleaners
    Calcium hydroxide: to neutralize soiul acidity in farms and gardens

13. -Acid rain contains pollutants such as sulphur dioxide and nitrous oxides which dissolve in water to form acids.
    -Products formed by the decomposition of plants by microorgranisms are acidic

14. pungent smell, very volatile, water-soluble, less dense than air

15. refer to textbook for complete list

16a) Moist red litmus paper turns blue in presence of ammonia gas. Collect ammonia with a gas syringe.
16b) To prevent backflow of cold-condensed water. The hot test tube may crack by sudden decrease of temperature.

17. Excess NaOH: Zn(OH)2, Al(OH)3, Pb(OH)2      Excess NH3: Zn(OH)2, Cu(OH)2, Ag2O
    This is because complex ions, which are soluble in water, are formed.

18. Method 1: Add calcium chloride. Only white precipitate is formed in a solution containing Na2CO3.
    Method 2: Add acid to both solutions. NaHCO3 absorbs heat whereas Na2CO3 releases heat.

19. FeCl2 + 2NH3 + 2H2O --> Fe(OH)2 + 2NH4Cl

20. Ionization is a process that produces new charged particles. Dissociation is the separation of charged particles that already exist in the compound.

21.
HCl: colourless corrosive liquid that gives out white fumes in air
HNO3: turns yellow on storage due to presence of dissolved nitrogen dioxide formed from decomposition of some of the acid, oxidizing and very corrosive, decomposes under light
H2SO4: colourless oily liquid, has dehydrating and oxidizing property
Safety: Wash the affected area with plenty of water then with very dilute sodium hydrogencarbonate solution

22. NaOH, KOH: very corosive, attack the skin readily and stain it yellow or even black
    Safety: place the affected area under slowly running cold water

23. Wear protective gloves and safety spetacles. Perform the experiments in fume cupboard to avoid breathing in any acid mist.

24a) Brown fumes evolve, copper dissolves to form a blue solution
24b) Solid turns black, spongy-like substance is formed

25. Add excess solid calcium hydroxide in water while stirring. Filter the white precipitate to obtain saturated calcium hydroxide solution (limewater).

26. Add NaOH (aq) to the 3 solutions. Only the white precipitate formed in solutions with mangesium ion does not redissolve in excess NaOH (aq).
    Add NH3 (aq) to the 2 solutions with zinc ions and lead (II) ions. Only the white precipitate formed in solution with zinc (II) ions redissolve in excess NH3 (aq).

27. -NaOH (aq) is corrosive in nature, while NH3 (aq) is highly soluble in water and highly volatile. 
    -When applied to the soil, a significant amount of ammonia can be lost through evaporation before it has a chance to effectively neutralize the soil acidity.
    -The high solubility can potentially lead to the leaching of ammonia, so it is easily removed by the soil water

Chapter 28 

1. A chemical cell is a device that converts chemical energy to electrical energy. Electricity is a flow of electric charges/charged particles.

2. Chemical cells can be classified into dry cells, wet cells and fuel cells. They can also be classified into primary cells (non-rechargeable) and secondary cells (rechargeable).

3a) Primary cell: zinc carbon cell, alkaline manganese cell, silver oxide cell
    Secondary cell: lithium oxide cell, nickel-metal hydride cell, lead acid acccumulator
3b) refer to textbook

4. Shape, size, price, voltage, charge capacity (unit: mAh), shelf life, rechargeability, voltage over discharge, current required, used continuously/intermittently, operating temperature range

5. Contains toxic substances (e.g. mercury in zinc carbon cell, lead in lead acid accumulator)
   Chemicals leaked from cells may contaminate soil (e.g. nickel (II) hydroxide is carciogenic, H2SO4/KOH is corrosive)
   Waste of materials (secondary cells can be recharged: more economically and environmentally friendly then primary cells)

6a) It refers to the maximum amount of electric charge a cell can store and deliver. (determines how long a cell can provide electrical power before it needs to be recharged)
6b) It is quantity of energy in a material per unit of volume in a cell.

Chapter 29

1. A simple chemical cell can be set up by dipping two different metals in an electrolyte. The two metals are connected by an external wire.

2. Ions comes from an atom which loses or gains electrons. Electrons are fundamental particles of an atom.

3a) Mg is the negative electrode and Cu is the positive electrode. Mg has a higher position in the ECS and loses electrons more readily than Cu.
3b) Electron flows from the Mg electrode to the Cu electrode through the external circuit.
3c) Mg (s) --> Mg2+ (aq) + 2e-      Cu2+ (aq) + 2e- --> Cu (s)
3d) Magnesium electrode dissolves. Reddish brown solid is depositted at the copper electrode. 

4. Contact surface area between electrode and electrolyte, concentration of electrolyte, temperature

5. Watermelon contains lots of sugar which is not an electrolyte.

6. Electromotive force refers to the maximum voltage of the cell. The greater the e.m.f. of a cell, the greater is the difference between the electron losing tendency
   of the positive and negative electrode in the cell.

7a) There is direct transfer of electrons from the Mg electrode to the Cu2+ ions in the solution (displacement reaction occurs). 
7b) It completes the circuit by allowing ions to move from one half-cell into the other.
    It provides ions to balance the charges in the solutions of the two half-cells.
7c) It should be soaked in SATURATED potassium nitrate solution. (or saturated NH4NO3, NaNO3)
7d) Insoluble Mg(OH)2 will be formed and blocks the salt bridge, which affects electron flow and voltage of the cell.

8a) It acts as a salt bridge which allows ions to move between the two solutions thorugh its small holes, so as to maintain the electrical neutrality in two half cells.
8b) The 2 electrolytes are mixed together. There is direct transfer of electrons from Cu to Ag+. No electron flow to the external circuit. The reading of voltmeter is zero.

Chapter 30

1. A redox reaction is a process in which reacting substances undergo changes in oxidation number. The reaction between hydrogen sulphide and oxygen is a redox reaction.

2. Use lead (II) ethanoate paper. It turns shiny black.

3. Oxidation is the process in which a substance gains oxygen/loses hydrogen/loses electrons/increases in oxidation number.
   Reduction is the process in which a substance loses oxygen/gains hydrogen/gains electrons/decreases in oxidation number.
   Oxidation agent is a substance that loses oxygen/gains hydrogen/accepts electron/decreases in oxidation number.
   Reduction agent is a substance that gains oxygen/loses hydrogen/loses electrons/increases in oxidation number.

4. Redox Reactions: combustion, displacement, decomposition, corrosion of metals
   Non-redox reactions: neutralization, precipitation, decomposition

5. The oxidation number of an element in a compound is the charge of an atom of the element would have if the atom existed as an ion.

6. Refer to list in textbook

7. When concentrated nitric acid is added to solid Fe2+ salts, the salts dissolve to form a yellow solution. Brown gas is evolved on the surface of the solution. 
   In the reaction, concentrated nitric acid is reduced to form nitrogen dioxide gas, while Fe2+ ions are oxidized to form Fe3+ ions. When concentrated nitric acid is added to aqueous Fe2+ salts, the pale green solution turns yellow. 
   Brown gas evolves at the mouth of the test tube. In the reaction, concentrated nitric acid is diluted, which is reduced to form nitrogen monoxide gas. The nitrogen monoxide gas reacts with oxygen in the air to form brown nitrogen dioxide gas. 
   Fe2+ ions are reduced to form Fe3+ ions.

8. Rest with a filter paper soaked with a suitable oxidizing agent like KMnO4-/H+. In presence of SO2, the colour of the filter paper changes to white.

9. Chlorine, compounds with hypochlorite ion (e.g. sodium hypochlorite)

10. Add a non-aqueous solvent like heptane to both of the solutions. The heptane layer floats on the top and extracts most of the bromine or iodine form the bottom aqueous layer.
    Bromine is orange-red in the heptane layer while iodine is purple.

11. The reaction in which a species is simultaneously reduced and oxidized in called a disproportionation reaction.

12. It reacts to form toxic chlorine gas.

Chapter 31

1. Inert electrodes are electrodes that do not take part in the cell reaction. They only provide a surface for cell reaction.

2. No. There is direct transfer of electrons between the 2 electrolytes (from reducing agent to oxidizing agent)

3. A fuel cell is a type of primary cell in which the reactants are continuously replaced as they are consumed and the products are continuously removed.

4. They act as electrical conductors connecting the fuel cell to the external circuit, but also as catalyst for the reactions which occur in the cell.

5a) Advantages: provides steady supply of electricity, high efficiency of energ conversion, the only product (water) is non-polluting
5b) Disadvantages: not easy to store/transport H2/O2, electrodes are expensive, liqeufaction of hydrogen and oxygen is expensive due to use of high pressure

6. Fresh potato contains more water. More mobile ions are present for the conduction of electricity.
