Chapter 20 -- Fossil Fuels

1a) What are fossil fuels? What do they have in common?
 Ans: Fuels formed from the dead remains of living organisms that lived millions of years ago. 
      They contain hydrocarbons.

1b) Describe the process of formation of fossil fuels.
 Ans: Under high temperature and pressure and the action of bacteria, the remains change into <fuel>.

1c) Name (i) three common fossil fuels. (ii) how they are extracted (iii) composition of mixture (if applicable)

1d) Arrange the following in asecnding boiling point and name their appliactions: refinery oil, petrol, naphtha, kerosene, diesel oil, fuel oil, wax, bitumen

Ans: Fuels for transporation, heating, electricity/ raw materials in the petrochemical industry

2. In oil refining, name the separation method of hydrocarbons. Why can this method be used?

Ans: Fractional distillation. Different hydrocarbons have different boiling points.

3a) Explain the procedures for the separation of crude oil in a laboratory.
 Ans: -Heat the petroleum gently. (lightest fraction comes out first)
      -Collect the fraction in the test tube and replace it with a new test tube when no more liquid comes out.
      -Heat the petroleum at higher and higher temperatures. (heavier fractions come out one by one)

3b) Draw the setup (hint: rocksil soaked with petroleum)
3c) Consider a fractional distillation setup. What is the use of (i) glass beads in the fractionating column (ii) anti-bumping granules?
    (iii) Why should cooling water enter at the lower end of the condenser? (iv) Why should the system be opened? [RECAP]

4. Describe the following properties of hydrocarbons from lower to higher fractions: 
 (i) boiling point (ii) colour (iii) viscosity (iv) speed of evaporation (v) ease of burning (vi) flame

5. Explain why the global demand for petrol is greater than that of kerosene.

Ans: Petrol is mainly used for motor cars. The rapid growth in the number of motor cars makes the demand for petrol much greater than that of kerosene.

6*. Explain why it is hazardous to add cold water to a tray of containing molten wax at a high temperature.

Ans: The high temperature of molten wax causes water to evaporate rapidly [1]. The steam produced causes the molten wax to splash out, which may cause burning of skin [1].

7. Compare the (i) flame colour (ii) flame sootiness in complete and incomplete combustion.

8a) Name the common air pollutants/environmental problems as a result of burning fossil fuels. [5+1+1+1]
8b) Name their hazards and impacts toward humans and the environment. [5+1+1+1]
8c) Suggest ways to minimize pollutants. [5+1+1+1] (e.g. burning fuel at higher temperatures with excess air)

Ans: Catalytic converter (Pt catalyst), electrostatic precipitator, scrubbers (remove acidic SO2), use fuel with low S content etc.

9. Suggest some advantages and disadvantages of using fossil fuels as energy sources.

Ans: -readily available in many places of the world
     -cheaper than most alternative energy sources
     -non-renewable, reserves are limited
     -burning ~ leads to air pollution (e.g. NOx, SO2, CO, C)

     Gaseous fuels: easily transported by pipes + cheap, contains highly toxic CO(g)

10. Explain why LPG is a cleaner fuel than diesel.

Ans: -contains less no. of C atoms per molecule -> more complete combustion -> less air pollutant -> cleaner

11. What is the composition of a) LPG b) Town gas.

12. Why does the cost of town gas in HK when the cost of crude oil rises? 

Ans: Town gas is produced from naphtha, which is a fraction of crude oil.

13. State the 2 advantages of using naphtha over coal to make town gas.

Ans: -Naptha is a liquid at room temp., can be easily stored in tanks and transported in pipes; coal is a soild, difficult to transport by pipes
     -Less air pollutants are produced when naphtha is used to make town gas compared to coal

14. State the safety precautions in using household gaseous fuels, and what should be done if there is suspected smell of gas leakage.

15. What is a pollutant? (Ans: A harmful toxic substance present in our environment at a level that is high enough to cause damage to our health and properties)

16. How can we test for a) CO (g) b) acidic gases c) particulates present in car exhaust?

Ans: a) Bubble the car exhaust into citrated blood. The colour of blood changes from dark red to cherry red
     b) Bubble the car exhaust into universal indicator. It turns red. Carbonic acid, nitric acid and nitrous acid are formed.
     c) Pass the car exhaust over a piece of wet filter paper. Dirty dark spots are observed. C(s) particles are stuck on it.

17. Write the chemical equations for the formation of acid rain. (SO2 -> H2SO3, H2SO3 -> H2SO4, NO2 -> HNO2 + HNO3, HNO2, HNO3)

18. Suggest 1 reason why there was a large incrase in conc. of methane in the atmosphere. (Ans: Increase in no. of rice paddies/cattle. Remains/manure decay to give methane) 

19. Suggest some alternatives energy sources that are renewable.

Common misconceptions/other tips/points to note:
1. Fossil fuels can contain elements other than C or H (e.g. sulphur). SO2 is released when coal burns.
2. Cars with catalytic convert must use unleaded petrol. Otherwise, the lead compounds will 'poison' the catalyst.
3. Town gas in HK contains an odourant (S-compounds) to give a characteristic smell to warn consumers of leakage of town gas.
4. Biodiesel, containing oxygen atoms and made from fat and oil, can be used to cut down pollutant from cars. 
5. When suggesting ways to alleviate environmental problems, pay attention to what pollutants (e.g. NOx) are involved.

Chapter 21 -- Homologous series, structual formulae and the naming of carbon compounds

1. What is organic chemistry?

2. Explain why carbon is an unique element/can form so many compounds. (Note: silicon cannot form rings are si bonds are weaker than c bonds)

3. Draw/write the (i) structual formula (ii) condensed structual formula (iii) skeletal formula of the following compounds.

4. What is a functional group? (Ans: it is an atom or group of atoms responsible for most of the chemical properties of a compound)

5. What is a homologous series? What characteristics do they have? 

Ans: -a family of organic compounds
     -have the same general formula
     -each member is different from the next member by a -CH2- unit (RMM differ by 14.0)
     -show a gradual change in physical properties
     -similar chemical properties

6. Using the IUPAC system, name (i) alkanes (ii) alkenes (iii) alkanols (iv) alkanoic acids.

7. Are these compounds (i) saturated/unsaturated (ii) aliphatic/aromatic

Common misconceptions/other tips/points to note:
1. Organic compounds with only single bonds are said to be saturated. Otherwise (multiple bonds), they are unsaturated.
2. Aliphatic H/Cs: straight/branched chains, non-aromatic rings, Aromatic H/Cs: /w benzene ring(s) (carciogenic)
3. Do more practice for the naming of organic compounds

Chapter 22 -- Alkanes and alkenes

1. Summarise the physical properties of alkanes and alkenes.

2a) What products are formed in the combustion of alkanes? Compare the sootiness of the flame.
2b) What is a substitution reaction? (Ans: a chemical change in which an atom/group of atoms of an organic molecule is replaced by another atom/group of atoms)
2c) Why is a mixture of products usually obtained in substitution reactions? (Ans: It is hard to stop the reaction at a particular stage)
2d) Name the three steps of a subtitution reaction and draw all the chemical equations. [3+6]

Note: presence of light/heat is required (to break bond)

3a) What is cracking? (the process of breaking down large molecules into smaller ones)
3b) What is its industrial importance? (Ans: to produce extra petrol, to produce alkenes which are the RMs of synthetic products)
3c) Describe the cracking process. What products are obtained?
3d) Draw a cracking setup for a laboratory experiment. (hint: rocksil soaked with liquid paraffin, broken pieces of unglazed porcelain, water trough)

4a) What is an addition reaction? (Ans: a reaction in which 2 or more molecules react to give a single molecule)
4b) Suggest 2 examples of addition reactions with alkenes. Write down their chemical equations and observation.
 Ans: reaction with halogens, reaction with cold KMnO4; solution decolurises rapidly

Note: KMnO4 reaction is a redox reaction; MnO4- is reduced to very pale pink Mn2+, alkene is oxidized to a diol
Note: presence of sunlight/UV light/heat is NOT required

5. Compare the characteristics of the flame between combusting alkanes and alkenes.

6. Draw a setup to identify the products from the complete combustion of an alkane. 

7a) Explain why combustion of petrol can produce power. [2]
 Ans: -the reaction is highly exothermic/produces a large amount of heat
      -there is an expansion of gases, which can produce power

7b) What would happen if air is insufficient for the combustion of petrol in car engine?
 Ans: loss of power, carbon soot formed, CO produced, incomplete combustion of fuels

8. Which compounds, pentane or octane, will burn with a more sooty flame? Why? [COMMON]

Ans: -Octane, because octane has a higher percentage of carbon by mass [1]
     -Octane is more difficult to burn completely (chance to undergo incomplete combustion to give C is higher) [1]

9. Explain why the aluminium oxide is strongly heated while the rocksil is only gently heated from time to time in the cracking process.

Ans: To make sure that the aluminium oxide is hot enough for catalytic reaction

Common misconceptions/other tips/points to note:
1. Sootiness of flame depends on the percentage molecular mass of carbon in the compound.
2. Average molecular mass of air = 28.5 (-28.8)

Chapter 23 -- Addition Polymers

1. Why properties do plastics have that make them so useful? (e.g. cheap, strong but light, easily moulded, easily dyed, good insulators, not easily corroded, low density)

2. Define the following terms:
 a) Monomer (A small molecule used to form a polymer)
 b) Polymerization (the process of repeatedly joining many monomers together to form the polymer)
 c) Polymer chain (a very large molecule formed by many smal molecules being joined together repeatedly)
 d) Polymer (a mixture of polymer chains with different R.M.M.)
 e) Repeating unit (the smallest recurring unit in a polymer chain) 
 f) Thermoplastics (plastics which can softened or melted upon heating and hardened on cooling repeatedly)

3. Explain the thermal properties of thermoplastics.

Ans: -Only weak intermolecular forces exists between polymer chains
     -Upon heating, the plastic absorbs energy and some of the weak intermolcular forces are broken
     -Polymer chains can slide over one another easily -> can be softened/melted upon heating
     -Upon cooling, the polymer chains come closer and attract one another -> hardened

4. What is addition polymerization? (Ans: Monomer molecules are joined together to form polymer chains WIHTOUT LOSING ANY ATOM.)

5. Explain why polypropene burns with a more sooty flame. (More carbon per one molecule)

6. Suggest one rason why PVC (polyvinyl chloride) is not used for making food containers. (Ans: Its monomer and plasticizer are toxic)

7. State 2 properties that enable Teflon (polytetrafluoroethene) to be used as the non-stick coating for frying pans. (Ans: high m.p., non-toxic)

8. State the 6 common types of addition polymers and a few of their properties and applications. (soft/hard, price, toxicity, flammability, m.p.)

Ans: PE: plastic toys; PP: plastic bags; PVC: bottles; PS: feeding bottles for babies; expanded PS: disposable cups + food boxes
     Perspex: aircraft windows, advertising display (optical fibres); Teflon: non-stick coating for frying pans

9*. Suggest 1 reason why glass bottles are preferred to plastic bottles for the storage of champagne.

Ans: Champagne contains a pressurized carbon dioxide solution. Glass can withstand the pressure.
     The ethanol solution (champagne) can dissolve unpolymerized monomers in plastic.

10a) How can polystyrene be prepared in the laboratory?

Ans: -Heat a mixture of styrene and kerosene under reflux using a sand bath in a fume cupboard
     -The reaction mixture is cooled and poured into methanol (decrease solubility of PS in kerosene), a white and waxy solid will float on methanol.

10b) Suggest 3 safety precautions regarding the above experiment.

Ans: Oil bath: kerosene is flammable; Fume cupboard: styrene vapour is irritant; anti-bumping granules: smooth boiling

11. Explain whether PVC is suitable for making electric sockets or not. (Ans: No. PVC is a thermoplastics and melts upon heating.)

12. Explain why polyethene is NOT suitable for making feeding bottles for babies.

Ans: Feeding bottles are usually sterilized by heating in boiling water. PE has a low m.p. and will deform at temp. of boiling water.

13. Suggest some treatments of plastic wastes and compare their advantages and disadvantages.

Ans: -Landfilling: fast and efficient + not much air pollution caused; needs a large amount of land
     -Incineration: reduce land wastage; produces toxic air pollutants
     -Direct recycling: save materials/petroleum; high operation cost
     -Recycling of energy: E obtained can be used as fuel; produces toxic air pollutants
     -Recycling of chemicals: save materials/petroleum; high operation cost

14. Suggest 1 reason why PS should be expanded before it is used to make disposable lunch boxes.

Ans: To improve the heat insultating properties of the material.

15. With reference to given structure, explain whether nylon is a thermoplastic or a thermosetting plastic.

Ans: Thermoplastic, because there are no cross links between polymer chains.

Common misconceptions/other tips/points to note:
1. A polymer is not a single compound, a repeating unit is not a molecule. 
2. Addition polymer and its monomer must have the same composition by mass.
3. For addition polymers, all atoms in the backbone must be carbon. (if it contains other elements like O/N, it is a condensation polymer)
4. When PVC is heated, hydrogen chloride and chlorine is produced (burns with acidic smell).